---
layout: post
title: "Homelab v2025"
date: 2025-03-26
category:
  - "Mortumm"
---
The current setup is very simple and lightweight for a homelab environment. Does exactly what it needs to do, without unnecessary complexity or bloat, and is easily replicable to a new setup once any of the hardware ultimately fails. Using recycled hardware for low cost operation.

### Background

There's been a server of sorts humming in the corner of varying rooms throughout the years and living spaces of mine. In _every_ one of em. Since the early 2000's. It's been more in the likes of hobby than anything more serious such as a work. But also for learning and fun to be fair.

Their necessity or use case has varied a lot too, from game servers to development environments, backups or for local media streaming. After all the changes throughout time, the current ones I have running have quite the simple requirements and purposes.

### Dell OptiPlex (SSF)
A recycled but working specimen with low power profile, that could still be adjusted/tinkered further for power efficiency. Mainly a file server and backup solution. Running a headless Ubuntu Server, though I'm looking in to NixOS to make the environment itself leaner.

Specs:
  - Processor: Intel Core i5-8500T
  - Memory: 8GB DDR3
  - Storage: 512GB+512GB SSD

Running the following Docker containers:
  - RustDesk
  - Doc
  - irssi
  - NextCloud

### Raspberry Pi

Functions as an ad blocker with Pi-Hole but also as my backup IRC client and file server. Running Raspbian in headless mode.

### MurderBox

The heavyhitter in the homelab. Rendering and number crunching machine. Small amount of time dedicated for streaming and gaming. PopOS as a daily driver, debloated Windows 11 for gaming and streaming.

Specs:
  - Processor: AMD Ryzen 7 5800X
  - Memory: 32GB DDR4
  - GPU: RTX 3070Ti

### MacBook Pro 16" M2

The main workhorse, not a physical part of the homelab per say but a tool that works all day long. And it just works. Minimal ricing on desktop environment.

### Network

Very basic network setup with a router and an unmanaged switch. ufw with only the required holes for services used, Fail2ban on servers for security. Tailscale to provide secure remote access, on each device which also enables remote access with RustDesk easily for GUI applications if needed.

### Final thoughts

Like in the intro, this is something that suits my needs and something that I have concluded to work the best, or the easiest so far. Minimal hassle, maximized usage.
From the long list of to-do's: Make scripts for quick and easy installation and configuration on new hardware. Upgrading to a managed switch and implementing VLANs for better network segmentation. A proper rack with enterprise grade hardware would be a welcome addition, but only once I stumble upon such specific used hardware.
